.\" SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2026 Travis Post <post.travis@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
.\"
.\" verilyze.conf(5) - verilyze configuration file
.\"
.Dd 2026-03-09
.Dt VERILYZE.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm verilyze.conf
.Nd verilyze configuration file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file configures verilyze (vlz), a Software Composition Analysis tool for
dependency vulnerabilities. The file is written in TOML format.
.Pp
Configuration is read from (lowest to highest precedence):
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
System-wide:
.Pa /etc/verilyze.conf
.It
Per-user:
.Pa $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/verilyze/verilyze.conf
(or
.Pa ~/.config/verilyze/verilyze.conf
if XDG_CONFIG_HOME is unset)
.It
User-specified:
.Pa path
given via
.Fl c
or
.Fl -config
.El
.Pp
Environment variables
.Ev VLZ_*
and CLI flags override any config file. See
.Xr vlz 1
for precedence details.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va cache_db
Path to CVE cache database (default: XDG_CACHE_HOME or /var/cache).
Env: VLZ_CACHE_DB.
CLI: --cache-db.

.It Va ignore_db
Path to false-positive (ignore) database (default: XDG_DATA_HOME or /var/lib).
Env: VLZ_IGNORE_DB.
CLI: --ignore-db.

.It Va parallel_queries
Max concurrent CVE queries (1-50).
Default: 10.
Env: VLZ_PARALLEL_QUERIES.
CLI: --parallel.

.It Va scan_exclude_dirs
Comma-separated directory names to skip during manifest discovery (default: .git).
Default: .git.
Env: VLZ_SCAN_EXCLUDE_DIRS.
CLI: --scan-exclude-dir (repeatable).

.It Va reachability_mode
Reachability mode for scan output: off, tier-b, or best-available (default: tier-b).
Default: tier-b.
Env: VLZ_REACHABILITY_MODE.
CLI: --reachability-mode.

.It Va cache_ttl_secs
Default cache TTL in seconds (5 days); only affects new entries.
Default: 432000.
Env: VLZ_CACHE_TTL_SECS.
CLI: --cache-ttl-secs.

.It Va min_score
Minimum CVSS score to count toward exit code.
Default: 0.
Env: VLZ_MIN_SCORE.
CLI: --min-score.

.It Va min_count
Minimum count of CVEs meeting min-score to trigger exit code (0 = any).
Default: 0.
Env: VLZ_MIN_COUNT.
CLI: --min-count.

.It Va exit_code_on_cve
Exit code when CVEs meet threshold (default 86).
Default: 86.
Env: VLZ_EXIT_CODE_ON_CVE.
CLI: --exit-code-on-cve.

.It Va fp_exit_code
Exit code when only false-positives are present (default 0).
Default: 0.
Env: VLZ_FP_EXIT_CODE.
CLI: --fp-exit-code.

.It Va project_id
Project ID for false-positive scoping (FR-015); only FPs for this project or global apply.
Env: VLZ_PROJECT_ID.
CLI: --project-id.

.It Va backoff_base_ms
Base delay in ms for retry backoff.
Default: 100.
Env: VLZ_BACKOFF_BASE_MS.
CLI: --backoff-base.

.It Va backoff_max_ms
Maximum delay in ms for retry backoff.
Default: 30000.
Env: VLZ_BACKOFF_MAX_MS.
CLI: --backoff-max.

.It Va max_retries
Maximum retries for transient errors.
Default: 5.
Env: VLZ_MAX_RETRIES.
CLI: --max-retries.

.It Va provider_http_connect_timeout_secs
CVE provider HTTPS connect timeout in seconds (default 15).
Default: 15.
Env: VLZ_PROVIDER_HTTP_CONNECT_TIMEOUT_SECS.
CLI: --provider-http-connect-timeout-secs.

.It Va provider_http_request_timeout_secs
CVE provider HTTPS total request timeout in seconds (default 120).
Default: 120.
Env: VLZ_PROVIDER_HTTP_REQUEST_TIMEOUT_SECS.
CLI: --provider-http-request-timeout-secs.

.It Va tls_crl_bundle
Optional PEM CRL bundle path for Linux CVE provider TLS (SEC-021); empty disables.
Env: VLZ_TLS_CRL_BUNDLE.
CLI: --tls-crl-bundle.

.It Sy [severity.v2] , Sy [severity.v3] , Sy [severity.v4]
CVSS score thresholds: critical_min, high_min, medium_min, low_min.
Defaults: 9.0, 7.0, 4.0, 0.1.

.It Sy [lang].regex
Per-language regex for manifest file names (e.g. [python], [rust], [go]).
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /etc/verilyze.conf
System-wide configuration (lowest precedence).
.It Pa $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/verilyze/verilyze.conf
Per-user configuration.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vlz 1 ,
.Nm vlz config --list
.Sh AUTHORS
verilyze is developed by Travis Post and contributors.
See the repository for the full list.
