.\" SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2026 Travis Post <post.travis@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
.\"
.\" vlz(1) - verilyze SCA command-line tool
.\"
.Dd 2026-03-10
.Dt VLZ 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vlz
.Nd verilyze Software Composition Analysis command-line tool
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl v
.Op Fl c Ar path
.Ar subcommand
.Op Ar options
.Op Ar args
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a fast, modular Software Composition Analysis (SCA) tool for dependency
vulnerabilities. It scans a directory tree for manifest files (e.g. Python
requirements.txt, pyproject.toml; Rust Cargo.toml), parses dependencies,
resolves transitive versions via lock files or package managers, queries CVE
providers (default: OSV.dev), and reports vulnerabilities.
.Pp
Configuration precedence (highest to lowest): CLI flags, environment variables
.Ev VLZ_* ,
user config file, system config. See
.Xr verilyze.conf 5
for config file format.
.Sh GLOBAL OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl c Ar path , Fl -config Ar path
Override configuration file location.
.It Fl v , Fl -verbose
Increase verbosity (repeat for more detail).
.El
.Sh SUBCOMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Nm scan
.Op Ar path
Scan directory tree for manifests and CVEs. Default root is current directory.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -format Ar fmt
Output format: plain, json, sarif, cyclonedx, spdx (default: plain).
.It Fl -summary-file Ar type:path
Generate additional files (e.g. html:/tmp/out.html,cyclonedx:/tmp/sbom.json).
.It Fl -provider Ar name
Force CVE provider (osv, nvd, github, sonatype when built with features).
.It Fl -parallel Ar N
Parallel query limit (default 10, max 50).
.It Fl -cache-db Ar path
Override cache database path.
.It Fl -ignore-db Ar path
Override false-positive database path.
.It Fl -cache-ttl-secs Ar secs
Default TTL for new cache entries (default: 432000 = 5 days).
.It Fl -offline
Disable network; exit 4 if CVE lookup needed.
.It Fl -benchmark
Benchmark mode (no cache, no network, parallel=1).
.It Fl -min-score Ar score
Minimum CVSS score to count toward exit code (default: 0).
.It Fl -min-count Ar N
Minimum CVE count meeting min-score to trigger exit (0 = any).
.It Fl -exit-code-on-cve Ar code
Exit code when CVEs meet threshold (default: 86).
.It Fl -fp-exit-code Ar code
Exit code when only false-positives present (default: 0).
.It Fl -package-manager-required
Require package manager on PATH; exit 3 with hint if missing.
.It Fl -backoff-base Ar ms
Base delay in ms for retry backoff (default: 100).
.It Fl -backoff-max Ar ms
Maximum delay in ms for retry backoff (default: 30000).
.It Fl -max-retries Ar N
Maximum retries for transient errors (default: 5).
.It Fl -provider-http-connect-timeout-secs Ar secs
CVE provider HTTPS connect timeout in seconds (default: 15).
.It Fl -provider-http-request-timeout-secs Ar secs
CVE provider HTTPS total request timeout in seconds (default: 120).
.It Fl -severity-v2-critical-min Ar score
.It Fl -severity-v2-high-min Ar score
.It Fl -severity-v2-medium-min Ar score
.It Fl -severity-v2-low-min Ar score
.It Fl -severity-v3-critical-min Ar score
.It Fl -severity-v3-high-min Ar score
.It Fl -severity-v3-medium-min Ar score
.It Fl -severity-v3-low-min Ar score
.It Fl -severity-v4-critical-min Ar score
.It Fl -severity-v4-high-min Ar score
.It Fl -severity-v4-medium-min Ar score
.It Fl -severity-v4-low-min Ar score
CVSS severity thresholds (defaults: 9.0, 7.0, 4.0, 0.1).
.El
.It Nm list
List registered language plugin names.
.It Nm config
Show or set configuration.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -list
Show effective configuration.
.It Fl -example
Output verilyze.conf.example with effective values.
.It Fl -set Ar key=value
Set a key (e.g. python.regex="^requirements\\.txt$").
.El
.It Nm db
Database subcommands.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Nm list-providers
List supported CVE providers.
.It Nm stats
Cache statistics.
.It Nm verify
Verify database integrity (SHA-256).
.It Nm migrate
Run database migrations.
.It Nm show
.Op Fl -format Ar fmt
.Op Fl -full
Display cache entries (key, TTL, added-at, CVE summary or full payload).
.It Nm set-ttl Ar secs
.Op Fl -entry Ar key
.Op Fl -all
.Op Fl -pattern Ar pattern
.Op Fl -entries Ar keys
Update TTL for existing cache entries.
.El
.It Nm fp
False-positive markings.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Nm mark Ar CVE-ID
.Op Fl -comment Ar text
.Op Fl -project-id Ar id
Mark CVE as false positive.
.It Nm unmark Ar CVE-ID
Remove false-positive marking.
.El
.It Nm generate-completions Ar shell
Generate shell completion script. Supported shells: bash, zsh, fish.
Output to stdout; redirect to the appropriate location for your shell.
.El
.It Nm preload
Placeholder; cache is populated on demand during scan.
.El
.Sh EXIT CODES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
Success: analysis completed; no CVEs or only false-positives (per fp-exit-code).
.It 1
Panic or internal error.
.It 2
Misconfiguration (unknown key, invalid value, etc.).
.It 3
Missing required package manager.
.It 4
CVE lookup needed but
.Fl -offline
was used.
.It 5
CVE provider fetch failed (network, API error, auth, etc.).
.It 86
One or more CVEs meet threshold (overridable via
.Fl -exit-code-on-cve ) .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /etc/verilyze.conf
System-wide configuration (lowest precedence).
.It Pa $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/verilyze/verilyze.conf
Per-user configuration (or
.Pa ~/.config/verilyze/verilyze.conf
if XDG_CONFIG_HOME unset).
.It Pa $XDG_CACHE_HOME/verilyze/vlz-cache.redb
CVE cache (non-privileged; or
.Pa ~/.cache/verilyze/vlz-cache.redb ) .
.It Pa /var/cache/verilyze/vlz-cache.redb
CVE cache (privileged install).
.It Pa $XDG_DATA_HOME/verilyze/vlz-ignore.redb
False-positive database (non-privileged; or
.Pa ~/.local/share/verilyze/vlz-ignore.redb ) .
.It Pa /var/lib/verilyze/vlz-ignore.redb
False-positive database (privileged install).
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev VLZ_CACHE_DB
Override cache database path.
.It Ev VLZ_IGNORE_DB
Override false-positive database path.
.It Ev VLZ_PARALLEL_QUERIES
Max concurrent CVE queries (1-50).
.It Ev VLZ_CACHE_TTL_SECS
Default cache TTL in seconds.
.It Ev VLZ_MIN_SCORE
Minimum CVSS score to count toward exit.
.It Ev VLZ_MIN_COUNT
Minimum CVE count to trigger exit.
.It Ev VLZ_EXIT_CODE_ON_CVE
Exit code when CVEs meet threshold.
.It Ev VLZ_FP_EXIT_CODE
Exit code when only false-positives present.
.It Ev VLZ_BACKOFF_BASE_MS
Base delay in ms for retry backoff.
.It Ev VLZ_BACKOFF_MAX_MS
Maximum delay in ms for retry backoff.
.It Ev VLZ_MAX_RETRIES
Maximum retries for transient errors.
.It Ev VLZ_PROVIDER_HTTP_CONNECT_TIMEOUT_SECS
CVE provider HTTPS connect timeout in seconds.
.It Ev VLZ_PROVIDER_HTTP_REQUEST_TIMEOUT_SECS
CVE provider HTTPS total request timeout in seconds.
.It Ev GITHUB_TOKEN
.It Ev VLZ_GITHUB_TOKEN
Optional; higher rate limits for GitHub Advisory provider.
.It Ev VLZ_SONATYPE_EMAIL
.It Ev VLZ_SONATYPE_TOKEN
Required for Sonatype OSS Index provider.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr verilyze.conf 5 ,
.Nm vlz config --list
.Sh AUTHORS
verilyze is developed by Travis Post and contributors.
See the repository for the full list.
